foreign
to be joined today by one of my best
friends in the world uh I was a
groomsman in his wedding somebody that
I've known for it's probably been like
12 years at this point uh Matt plank who
uh was first in AE with me at Echo sign
uh the first hire alongside Jameson last
week's podcast guest the first of two
hires that uh I was fortunate enough to
have me join at zenefits and now plank
is just continuing this unbelievable
career uh as the revenue lead for
Rippling
um and so excited to have you here plank
thanks for taking the time and excited
to talk about Rippling with uh this
incredible audience that sasters put
together yeah thanks for having me of
course so let's let's Jump Right In
um today we're going to talk a lot about
uh Rippling and the evolution of uh its
early Beginnings to uh a lot of
unbelievable success and if we sort of
fast forward to today Rippling is this
incredible success story it is a number
of different things it's a company that
is now valued at something like over 11
billion dollars
um that was evaluation as of like May of
this year so this is like a a fairly
current valuation
um after a lot of the correction uh
Founders fund is a very happy uh
investor and gladly participated in that
round as well
um it is a sort of success story and and
real Vindication of Parker Conrad from
xenovitz
um the revenue growth hundreds of
millions of dollars of ARR and so much
more but I know that it was a lot of uh
really hard work to get to where we are
today and and probably a lot of hard
work left as well but maybe as a
starting point it would be helpful to
understand
um what is Rippling and and tell us the
environment that existed when you joined
uh yeah so um the kind of simple
shortest way to describe Rippling is we
are
um you know we're kind of an employee
system of record that starts at you know
employee data at the core of that system
of record and then we do things like
payroll and benefits and identity
management device management I mean you
name it kind of anything you would think
of in like a traditional HCM Suite as
well as a lot of different I.T products
in the world like an OCTA or a jam for
anything like that
um and so to your point when we when we
started in this space uh we had you know
a lot of competitors we had a lot of
competitors that were doing parts of
what Rippling did but nobody that was
doing like all of what Rippling did
essentially if we were moving somebody
off of their current system to Rippling
in pretty much any case we were
replacing like an existing kind of HR
and payroll system whether that was a
modern solution like your you know
Augustus and if it's namely you know
those type of players or a legacy
solution like an ADP Paylocity paycon
um so we were like replacing HR systems
but then also for a lot of folks we were
helping them stand up kind of systems to
manage like I.T for their employees kind
of from the get-go focused mostly on
smaller companies when we first started
very cool and so um what you're
describing is one of the first things
that comes to mind when I think of
Rippling and it's uh Rippling was sort
of the next iteration of zenefits but it
was a very different Market that it
entered and when we joined his innovitz
and if it's was creating this new
category Rippling entered like a
relatively mature and Hyper competitive
space as a brand new business there was
xenovitz there was Gusto there was uh
namely just works probably um several
other folks and you entered as this sort
of like uh no no-name brand uh business
and and tell me about a little bit the
uh U-joint what existed how many
employees were there how many sales
people were there what did the company
look like
uh yeah so when I joined Rippling
um you were uh you know I was looking at
a few opportunities at the time and
Rippling was currently being run out of
the basement of Parker's house uh so it
was Parker uh a handful of Engineers who
were you know building kind of the first
version of the product and that was
really it I mean when we started
um Parker was giving all of the demos
like he was the sales rep for the
company
um I remember the first day he handed
over like a Google sheet of uh all of
his opportunities like that was a CRM
that we were using so it was literally
just company names and like a bunch of
raw notes from Parker and that was it
um and we had really nothing like we we
didn't you know we at that time we were
really we had Parker had gone through YC
for the second time around and so at
that point we were really just selling
the YC company he's like we had come out
of the recent winter batch uh and so
that was really what our top of funnel
was selling to other YC companies in the
batch
um and we were really starting from zero
I mean we had no paying customers at the
time
um for the most part so it was it was
definitely definitely early days
so so a lot of things that are
unconventional here
um you you joined as the VP of sales so
you joined as sort of a senior sales
leader and you were the first sales hire
that Rippling made so unconventional in
that uh uh myself Jason from zaster and
many others just like generic advice
around this is when you're ready to hire
sales people hire two individual
contributors and so Parker and you took
a different path there
um I guess to that end and another thing
there were four Engineers I think your
employee like number five uh this is
this is earlier than a typical sales
person certainly sales leader joins
um on the go to market side like what
did you do uh you joined this company
nobody knows who you are four Engineers
uh how do you get started
um yes yeah a really good point I mean I
think when we started um I mean I think
first of all part a little bit of it was
um there was kind of some mutual trust
for like both me and Parker like I
wouldn't have joined any other company
that was like running out of the
basement of someone's house and I don't
think you know Parker we had worked
together at zenefits for you know three
and a half years for a lot of that time
uh you know you and I shared a desk
sitting across from Parker so I kind of
got a lot of exposure to to Parker we
had a relationship with the audience so
it kind of made sense
um when we started it was literally you
know the first the first week it was
literally listening to part probably
first couple days as we know Parker
Parker doesn't have a ton of patience it
was like he did a few demos for me I was
like okay cool like I'm done doing demos
like here's the you know here's the talk
track and I kind of built out a script
started taking over the demos literally
like the week that I started and for the
most part was regurgitating you know
whatever Parker was saying
um and then I had to buy a CRM obviously
had to get us out of Google docs um we
bought Outreach super early on Parker
actually convinced uh Riley who had
moved over from zenfest Outreach to give
us like a free seat in the early days
which was a great play because we became
a big customer of theirs but we spun up
Outreach and so the really the first
primary things were like trying to build
out a lead database which was also an
interesting experience that was uh
that's a very interesting in industry
for anyone who's ever like tried to go
about acquiring like leads from lead
vendors and building a database like
lots of things that that you need to
know that I didn't know so we acquired
leads we built a database we plugged in
Outreach we started writing you know
cold email and dropping people into
sequences uh and those were the early
days I remember the first few people
that would respond you know you'd put
100 people in a sequence and somebody
would respond to your cold email and be
like this sounds interesting I'm
interested in the demo and like the
excitement from that there's nothing I
remember more about the early days more
so than the excitement of like someone
responding to a cold email even more so
than like the first contracts I went
signed was actually just like responding
to an email and being like yes I'll take
a demo
so I I love hearing you talk about this
it reminds me of early days of
businesses I've never joined a company
as early as employee five
um and I think like some takeaways here
are you you were the VP of sales uh and
you came in and you're acquiring lead
lists you've probably never done that
before you're buying I remember you
telling me the story that you set up
Salesforce for the company like you
implemented the CRM system and so you're
doing all of these like very Scrappy uh
uh not natural uh things that you have
any experience in because that's what
the business calls for
um and I think that's uh symbolic of the
type of hire that early stage uh
businesses really require you you were
talking about
um the first thing that you did it
sounds like Center ground outbound you
acquire lead list you acquire Outreach
you put people in sequence and then like
you cheer for uh those folks that
respond what what did you find was the
most effective content in those outbound
emails
um yeah you brought up a point earlier
that was that was interesting that um
you know we had joined a really
competitive space I mean you know almost
every company we were emailing in the
early days just kind of given like the
value prop we had was a company that was
likely already using like Gusto or
zenefits or like some kind of modern you
know all-in-one HR System all of the
companies at that time had kind of
rebranded around this like all-in-one HR
concept and so if we would have emailed
people with a with a pitch of like you
know hey we do you know all in one HR we
do you know employment agreements and um
you know HR and payroll benefits like
nobody would have responded to that
email and so what the way that we kind
of described what we did to people was
we basically wrote an email that was
something along the lines of like look
I'm sure that you have like um uh you
know an automated process for like
onboarding employees and managing HR and
payroll benefits we do that as well but
like when you hire somebody how do you
get them set up with a computer for the
first time like how do you go about
creating their accounts and all the
different systems that they had used if
you think back to 10 years ago when you
hired a sales rep it was like maybe two
to three accounts you would set up for
them it was like here's your email and
here's your you know video conference
tool and today when you hire a sales rep
they're probably anywhere from like 20
to 30 different tools that they get set
up with across their whole stack and if
you hire an engineer it's probably
something like 50. and so we kind of had
this like real specific pain point that
we knew that Founders were doing
themselves like the answer for everybody
was like I manually you know go to Apple
and like buy a computer and ship it to
their house I manually log on to all
these systems and I'm like add user Sam
blonde you know and then he gets an
email from that account and so we kind
of focused on the Green Field thing that
we knew that people were doing manually
uh and really that came from the
zenefits Playbook like at zenefits when
we emailed people we would write cold
email where it was like how do you do
how do you you know have employees sign
agreements like how do you add them to
payroll how do you add them to insurance
carrier websites they knew that the
answer for all of those was I do it
manually and so we were like looking for
that thing at Rippling which was not HR
and payroll it was really the I.T stuff
that we did and so that got a huge it
was also that like Founders often were
the people that were doing that and so
like the people that responded to the
email there was like this deep pain like
some of the responses would just be you
know people would literally they
wouldn't expect yes I want a demo they'd
be like oh my God I hate doing this so
much like can we talk tomorrow it was
just like you could tell that there was
a real pain point there
so you Parker starts this business
um and and the idea isn't like is it if
it's with a slightly better UI there has
to be this something that's sort of like
game changing that you're providing to
the market that is unique to your
offering
um and in your outbound you sort of
exposed this problem whether it be
through questions or maybe even
assumptions because uh you you already
know that the process that exists and
the problem that you're solving and you
really hone in on the differentiation
that your product or service provides to
uh gain interest you're going to solve
these Founders as you described it their
problem and in your emails you're going
to tell them how you're going to solve
their problem
yeah yeah I mean I remember even one of
the best emails that we wrote was
actually an email from Parker that was
to your point about the assumptiveness
of it it was like Hey like I'm not sure
if this is a problem for you but for for
me like one of the things I deeply
resent most about being like CEO of the
company is like all this busy work that
I have to do and I onboard an employee
things like getting agreement signed and
setting up computers and provisioning
accounts but he wrote it from the
perspective of like this is a huge pain
point for me it's like part of the
reason why I started Rippling and so and
we're emailing at the time like CEOs and
founders of tech companies and it was
just so obvious that they could resonate
with that pain Point that's awesome
um really interesting learnings uh now I
imagine outbound isn't the only thing
that you're focused on in the early days
um what are some other go to market
initiatives or channels that you found
effective uh early on
um the biggest one for us I I think to
your point like you're getting started
with outbound is is actually really easy
like you get the leads you put them in a
sequence and like you can you can really
start pretty much anything from there
um a big one for us that we knew we
wanted to invest in early on was Channel
and and it's really because it benefits
we were like anti-channel like
everybody's in right Insurance Brokers
or like a channel for pretty much any
kind of HCM company and for us like it
benefits our experience was obviously
like the you know entire broker
Community hated us we were direct
competitors and so not only did we not
get referrals from Brokers but we
actually also had all this like friction
in the market right we were competing
with like humans when we were winning
business uh we never had accountant
Partnerships when all of our competitors
like Gusto you know had an enormous
amount of their revenue in the early
days came from the accounting Channel
and so we knew it Rippling early on that
we needed to have a channel we didn't
just want to like go at it alone and
build this kind of Direct business with
competitors all around us and so we we
focused early on um both a broker
Channel which is obviously a lot of
irony for those that know the benefit
story well like you know in partnering
with Baroque like if anything in the
early days Brokers took calls with us
just to like you know see if Parker
would join the call like just to kind of
like you know talk a little bit about
zenefits so Brokers and accountants were
two of the biggest channels that we
invested in very deeply and there's like
tons of learnings across those
experiences as well
it resonates as you're talking I'm
thinking back to the early days of Rex
um and I'm not gonna go super deep here
but we did we did a lot of outbound
because uh to your point it's it's easy
to spin up and uh can realize pretty
immediate results
um we also invested heavily in
Partnerships uh some that come to mind
YC was huge for brex in the early days
uh and having a presence at like the
different events and even hosting
different events uh YC is a large
investor in brex and so having them
promote uh brex to the different batches
uh First Republic
um of course like non-investor in Rex so
not it like just using investors as a
channel isn't isn't super scalable
um one of the most successful
Partnerships that we uh put together
very early on Michael are are now CEO uh
uh put this together
um was with First Republic Bank and that
there are B2B banks that don't have a
card offering
um and so brex really became became
first Republic's corporate card for
their tech company customers and so the
quality of businesses that they referred
in the volume of the businesses that
they referred was really exciting and so
I think the takeaway there is even from
a very very early stage you can identify
these potential Partnerships where you
offer some complimentary uh a set of
solutions and
um really Drive behavior and demand and
it pays long-term dividends I mean to to
this day YC is still a huge source of uh
customers for bricks yeah I think one of
the things that I think people make the
mistake that people make are one one
mistake people make in channel is they
expect like they expect immediate
results and they expect to be able to
measure the impact of the channel like
incredibly directly and you have to have
like conviction with a channel because
it's not going to work right away like
Partners don't just show up and start
sending you like massive volume on day
one but you have to invest a lot to get
a channel partner to like get going you
have to like invest to get the refer
world then you got to win the customer
then you have to have a happy customer
and so it took us a while to get channel
to work but when we look at our at our
Revenue today channel is like a huge
percentage of Revenue it's a big
diversification for us uh across the
board um and so and then I think the
other thing besides like directly
attributed Revenue to channel which is
like a pretty significant portion of our
Revenue
um also there's just Channel influence
everywhere like now that we have you
know 100 sales reps across the country
like direct reps earn deals all day long
we're a channel partner like influences
the deal at the Finish Line right they
didn't refer it it's being handled by a
direct rep and all of a sudden after a
two-month sales cycle somebody's like
hey my insurance broker wants to talk to
you guys and work you know back in the
day we used to be like fingers crossed
like hopefully they have something good
to say you know and now today an
overwhelming majority of those Brokers
like I've heard of Rippling you know
they have some experience with us and
they're like always thumbs up for us and
so it has a lot more influence than what
you just measure through like Revenue
attributed to the Channel all right
um so so let's continue along this uh
scaling go to market at Rippling Journey
you join super early you start
generating some demand you you found
product Market fit through
um largely like I.T provisioning this
this service that competitors aren't
offering you spin up a bunch of
Partnerships to generate demand as well
um probably time to start scaling the
team uh let's talk a little bit about
how you thought about that what what did
you do there
yeah
um you know I think for for us uh
scaling was really from the early days
scaling was really always about like
getting more leads getting more demos at
the end of the day I think Parker was
like of course there was an ambitious
Revenue plan that in order to hit the
revenue plan you needed to hire reps who
carried a quota who would walk you up to
the revenue plan but we were committed
early on that we were never gonna like
we were never gonna like hire people to
you know convince ourselves that hiring
people would like solve our problems
like we didn't have any desire to grow
extremely quickly in the early days at
Rippling like headcount growth wasn't
something we ever really like celebrated
in the early days and we wanted to grow
efficiently we wanted to grow in ways
that were like scalable and so for us
that was lead so we had to get more
leads in the database we had to get more
leads in the database so we could send
more emails or we had to get more
effective with our emails like if we
were getting a one percent conversion
rate on it on a contact if we could get
a two percent conversion rate by writing
a better email then we could get twice
as many demos and have twice as many
reps and so so you know um like I think
in the early days you're kind of trying
to like fill calendars at least we were
I was always a big believer in and
really still to this day like we put
demos on reps calendars we did not hire
reps to be like go out and you know kind
of build your own pipeline reps
literally would do three four five demos
a day in the early days and we would
figure out like what's the right amount
of demos a rep can do before they've
ultimately like we start to get
diminishing returns you know by you know
they're too busy
um so we thought about getting more
leads we thought about getting more
demos and then we hired you know I hired
a couple people that were super critical
to the success of Rippling like the
first you know first SDR first sales rep
first handful of sales reps who came
kind of directly from my network we were
both Lucky after xenovitz to have this
like incredible network of people that
you knew were the right culture Builders
you knew were good you knew you could
like retain information
um and then so we built a database hired
people from the network and then I think
we hired like the right profile for us
which I think is really important to get
right early on
um you know for us like we had to hire
people that had like live demo
experience which sometimes I think
people maybe underestimate like how
important that is to be able to like
give a live demo and talk and also like
move right click around and like show
people stuff and then also high volume
like our reps were doing you know in the
early days like literally 40 plus demos
a month probably and most people it
would just ground on that volume and so
we identified like we need more leads we
know people in our Network we know are
good now we need to go hire like a few
people who are not from our Network and
like what's the right profile for that
and really dialing that in uh and then
once you have those three things it's
not a lot harder than that like you get
more leads and you hire more of the
right profile and you if you get the
wrong profile you tune it in from there
and
um and the last thing I think that was
actually a huge part of our a huge part
of our uh thinking and mind share was
like how do we like evade you know
Google spam filters like sitting around
with Persona or co-founder and Power
worker and really thinking through like
how do we get our emails delivered to
people that was like that didn't used to
be a problem you know five six years ago
and today it's like every startup buys a
lead list and blasts everybody with
emails and Google immediately Flags them
for spam and you're like domain you know
so anyways we spent a lot of time trying
to figure out like how do we get our
emails delivered we feel like when they
get delivered they're successful but
like how do we make sure they get
delivered
lots of really interesting takeaways
there so uh to start one your first
several hires were all in network and I
think that's something that's probably
uh uh Founders should expect out of
their sales leaders and probably all all
Executives
um some really critical and network
hires I know the first tires that you
made
um were now what has it been five and a
half years something like that yeah yeah
it'd be six years in May six years in
May and they're still there yeah and so
these are people that were sort of
instrumental in the success of uh uh
Rippling six years after the fact
they're still there contributing Revenue
so they've obviously been successful in
their own right
um so in-network hires and then I hear
two things that really influenced sort
of um the trajectory of hiring one is
the revenue targets
um you had increasing Revenue targets
you couldn't be the person the sales rep
because you you know this unconventional
Pro approach that you all took uh was
you were the VP of sales and the sales
rep you couldn't be that forever so you
needed people to help uh take take the
additional demos and ultimately hit
Revenue targets and then the second
thing that was a factor that was sort of
like mitigating on how many heads you
brought on was demos
um and so your role evolved a bit from
sort of like effectively the first
account executive glorified account
executive to spending a bunch of your
time on recruiting and making sure that
there was pipeline
um and so like demand gen effectively uh
for you to be able to scale one of the
things that that comes to mind as you're
telling these stories and you referenced
Parker a lot of times
um four months into zenefits uh we were
in 2014 our Target was 10 million in ARR
we started 2014 about 500 000 of ARR
Parker said this you know like uh uh
stratospheric Revenue Target of 10
million in a RR so 500 000 to 10 million
and like the end of March comes along
and we're doing well and we're excited
about it and Parker and I are in a
conference room at like 10 o'clock at
night one night and Parker's like hey I
want to talk through what it would take
to get us to 20 million in ARR this year
um and I was like oh
staying 10 o'clock you know Tuesday
conversation we're doing well let's have
some fun with it and we started putting
on the Whiteboard uh things that we
would do differently this year and there
were a lot of sort of like
unconventional ideas that came out of
that uh brainstorming session one of
them was like you know we would have to
hire a bunch of people and in order to
hire a bunch of people we would need
more than just the San Francisco market
and also we wouldn't want to scale
really aggressively in San Francisco so
we'd probably open like a second site
um which ultimately led to us opening up
Phoenix and and scaling really
aggressively there but you know at the
time like we were we were too uh
immature like no companies I just joined
three months ago we were 500 000 in ARR
just three months ago no companies were
really thinking about like a second site
to scale go to market and there were a
bunch of other uh I'll call them like
unconventional outcomes that came out of
that conversation you know you you know
the end of this story we changed the
revenue Target to 20 million like two
days later Parker couldn't keep the
secret and uh we hit it um and so that
was really exciting I'm curious uh just
knowing how businesses uh like as in if
it's run by park or operate did y'all
have similar conversations and what were
some unconventional uh scaling ideas
that came out of them yeah uh for sure
working for Parker means like you know
signing up for ambitious or at least
entertaining like the most ambitious
goals right just like being okay with
dreaming you know about whatever comes
out of Parker's head and seeing if you
can build a realistic plan to get to
that number uh that's something I've
learned over the years with Parker and I
think it's a really good exercise we
kind of demand that across the company
from everyone
um the things that we did I think
obviously we spoke about you know for us
like new logo acquisition was like
important like Parker from the very
beginning of Rippling we had one skew
when we started Rippling like one
product that we sold but Parker always
had the vision of building this compound
startup been building all of these
products on top of this like employee
you know this kind of employee data
model like that's ultimately how he
convinced me to come work at Rippling
because I didn't want to work at a Zen
if it's 2.0 either and he convinced me
like this is definitely not that and so
we always had that strategy but we knew
that like logo acquisition up front made
sense and so we we invested a lot of
local acquisition we did whatever it
took to win logos a big thing we did
that I think is underrated is we uh we
increased our pricing like multiple
times in the early days
um pretty dramatically and we and when
we did it we actually removed it from
our website as well we were competing in
a space where price team was transparent
like zenefits and Gusto and all these
guys had pricing it was cheap and it was
online you could sign up automatically
and so we kind of increased our pricing
but we were like look if people go look
at our websites they're gonna like not
sign up for a demo because we're more
expensive but we're going to take that
away we're going to be like request the
demo there is no more free sign up link
and so we increased pricing pretty
dramatically uh and nothing changed like
the win rates didn't go down at all you
know we just started making two three
times more per customer it was like
clear to us that that like we can you
charge more for the product and we've
done that you know throughout the six
year Journey any time that we could
until you get a little bit of friction I
think you have to do that and once you
find a little bit of friction it's like
okay that's good you want some friction
and pricing otherwise like it's not high
enough
um we obviously launched a lot of new
products so we had all these customers
and like his view time went on and we
launched more products we were able to
sell those add-on products into our
customer base and we have some like off
the charts net dollar retention from
being able to do that uh and then we
hired probably the most non-conventional
thing is we built a sales team out of
Bangalore uh that were basically for the
under kind of you know companies that
are setting up payroll for the first
time they probably want that like direct
click sign up that are you know you have
to close a lot of them to make the
economics work we built the sales team
that we have today based out of
Bangalore that today I think is like 15
16 people a director a couple managers
and those folks are like incredibly
efficient from how you know compared to
kind of how much revenue they close like
it's it's pretty extraordinary so that's
I encourage people to like build you
know you went to Tempe to build the team
more efficiently and like we did that in
India which at the time folks were
hiring like Engineers you know in places
like India but like not many people were
building like a sales team
um you know in India for like a kind of
you he's selling to us-based company so
that was pretty interesting
uh I I love all of these uh ways to
accelerate growth I mean it's innovids
in the way that we thought about
accelerating growth it was always what
you mentioned is the first thing which
is new logo acquisition how can we get
more customers
um and we did a lot of our modeling
around just acquiring new customers we
didn't have much pricing control there
but most people do for for context
xenovitz made money as a health
insurance broker the commission rates
were fixed um and so we didn't really
have this concept of pricing but most
software businesses and most businesses
broadly do
um and so what I'm hearing from you Matt
is early on we we were priced at sort of
parity with other Solutions and what we
found is like pricing was not a blocker
from us acquiring customers and so he
started pressure testing our pricing a
bit and we were able to raise prices to
where it still remained uh uh sort of
like frictionless to acquiring customers
and the math on this is simple if you
increase pricing by 30 and you closed
the same number of customers you've just
increased sales by 30 percent
um and the the second thing that you
mentioned that you did at an early early
stage is you introduced these additional
skus
um and so your Revenue per customer
likely increased dramatically is you had
these additional product offerings and
so
um you're still acquiring potentially
the same number of customers but those
customers are so much more valuable to
you and that accelerated Revenue growth
and I love the last one
um where if the the economics don't
totally make sense by hiring sales reps
in San Francisco to serve a specific
segment of the market you went not just
to sort of a lower cost us-based
location but you actually we went to
India which probably saved a lot of
money in the unit economics I imagine
look really attractive there and so this
is exactly what I was talking about
which is the like unconventional
thinking on how to scale Revenue outside
of the uh conventional wisdom which is
like we just need to get more customers
yeah yeah absolutely um it was uh and
those folks have you know scattered
across different places in the company
whether it's SDR account management like
they're in lots of different roles based
out of that team
you and I I think could go for like six
hours on this stuff we probably got to
where Rippling was it like 10 million in
ARR and y'all are hundreds of millions
of dollars in ARR today uh maybe we'll
do a part two
um where we go from like 10 to 100 or
something like that but this was a blast
and always awesome to see you
um thank you so much for being here and
disaster scale uh look forward to an
amazing conference so thank you for
having us and uh everybody have an
awesome rest of the day awesome thanks
Sam thanks everyone
[Music]